---
sidebar_position: 1
---

import CodeBlock from '@theme/CodeBlock'
import ReadmeSource from '!!raw-loader!@site/static/snippets/readme.py';

# Getting started

MatID is a Python package for identifying and analyzing atomistic systems based
on their structure. MatID is designed to help researchers in the automated
analysis and labeling of atomistic data.

# Learn

The package comes with different tools that can be connected together to form a
workflow for analyzing structures. The "Learn" section contains documentation
that helps you get to know the basic functionality of the package, most
importantly:

- [Symmetry-based Clustering](/docs/learn/symmetry-based-clustering): Learn how to identify and report repeating structures in
atomistic system. Works both with finite and periodic systems.
- [Symmetry Analysis](/docs/learn/symmetry-analysis): Routines for analyzing the symmetry of structures. Can be used to return a highly unique conventional cell, detailed Wyckoff position information etc.
- [Dimensionality Analysis](/docs/learn/dimensionality): Used to determine the intended dimensionality of a system taking periodic boundary conditions into account.

As a user, you are free to choose one or many of these tools for your analysis
purposes. A small example that combines several of the provided tools for
analysing an existing structure file is shown below

<CodeBlock language="python">{ReadmeSource}</CodeBlock>

## Reference

To learn more about the exact call signature of classes and functions, visit the
documents in the "Reference" section. It contains autogenerated documentation
for the key classes and modules.
