---
sidebar_position: 4
---

import Figure from '@site/src/components/Figure'
import CodeBlock from '@theme/CodeBlock'
import ConventionalCellSource from '!!raw-loader!@site/static/snippets/get_conventional_cell.py';

# Symmetry Analysis

The [`SymmetryAnalyzer`](/docs/reference/symmetryanalyzer) class in MatID contains several symmetry routines for
analyzing 3D structures. The basic features are based on the excellent `spglib`
library, but with an extended feature set that makes MatID unique. The following
subsections showcase some of its most interesting features and you can learn
more in the API reference.

## Conventional Cell

For each space group there is a conventional cell that has been standardized by
in [Volume A of International Tables for Crystallography
(ITA)](https://it.iucr.org/A/). `spglib` can report such cells, but MatID adds
an additional step of normalization upon it to make the structure even more
standardized. This conventional cell can be queried through the
[`get_conventional_system()`](/docs/reference/symmetryanalyzer#get_conventional_system)-function,
for example:

<CodeBlock language="python">{ConventionalCellSource}</CodeBlock>

Although the shape and symmetries of the cell are already well-defined for a
conventional cell reported by `spglib`, the exact location of atoms in the cell
can vary. The same structure can have multiple representations, which all look
different. If you are only interested in the symmetry properties of the system,
this may not be relevant. But if instead you wish to generate a more unique
structure for the conventional cell for visualization or identification
purposes, then additional processing is required.

Below is an example of the same rock salt structure (space group 225) in two
different configurations:

<div style={{display: 'flex'}}>
  <Figure src="/img/NaCl1.svg" caption="Na in Wyckoff position A"/>
  <Figure src="/img/NaCl1.svg" caption="Na in Wyckoff position B"/>
</div>

The only difference in these two structures is the way the Wyckoff positions
have been filled: the first one has X and the second one has Y. The conventional
cell reported by MatID makes an additional step of searching for the most unique
representation based on chirality-preserving Euclidean Normalizers. These are
reported e.g. by the [Bilbao Crystal database](https://www.cryst.ehu.es/). Each
normalizer is essentially a transform that can be applied to the structure to
gain a new form of the conventional cell without modifying the underlying
material. MatID iterates over these different representations and selects one
based on the population of different Wyckoff sites which differs among these
representations.

(Image of how MatID resolves all of them into the same conventional cell)

It should be noted that certain Wyckoff sites in certain space groups are
parametrized. MatID does not perform any selection between these parameters, so
in these cases the exact visual representation will still differ. By calling X
you can query whether the structure contains parametrized wyckoff positions.

## Wyckoff positions

MatID can report a detailed breakdown of the Wyckoff positions, including

## Material ID

[`SymmetryAnalyzer`](/docs/reference/symmetryanalyzer) can report a 28-digit character sequence for a given
structure. This is essentially a hash-digest which is seeded using information
about the space group, dimensionality and the Wyckoff sites occupied in the
conventional cell. Due to the way MatID generates the conventional cell, this
identifier is fairly unique and can be used in many cases to identify structures
3D and 2D materials with "enough" symmetry.

The material id can act as a convenient handle for finding materials with very
specific structure. As a simple example one could imagine trying to find the
forsterite structure. The filters required for this would include:

 - Space group number
 - Wyckoff position occupation (assuming a normalized one is available)

Often this information is not directly reported and if it is, it can be a
daunting task for the user to formulate the queries precisely. This is where the
material id can offer a shortcut: one can retrieve it using matid for any
structure and the

This identifier is not guaranteed to be unique, but can be highly useful in
practise. In some sense it has a similar value proposal to SMILES for molecules.
There are cases in which it will fail:

 - Parametrized Wyckoff sites
 - If isotropic scaling of cell should affect the material identification
 - If variable angles for the conventional cell are a problem
